Restructuring the encryption section (#52)
Haivision/srt-rfc: draft-sharabayko-mops-srt.md

- PACKET_FILTER flag indicates if the peer supports packet filter.

#### Key Material Extension Message {#sec-hsext-km}

> If an encrypted connection is being established, the Key Material (KM) is first transmitted as Handshake Extension message.
> In case of unprotected connection this extension is not supplied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an encrypted connection is being established, the Key Material (KM) is first transmitted as a 
Handshake Extension message. This extension is not supplied for unprotected connections.
```

The purpose of the extension is to let peers exchange and negotiate encryption-related information
to be used to encrypt and decrypt the payload of the stream.

The extension can be supplied with the Handshake Extension Type field set
to either SRT_CMD_KMREQ or SRT_CMD_HSRSP (see {{handshake-ext-type}} in {{ctrl-pkt-handshake}}).
For more details refer to {{handshake-messages}}.

The KM message is placed in the Extension Contents. See {{sec-ctrlpkt-km}} for the structure of the KM message.

#### Stream ID Extension Message {#sec-hsext-streamid}

> The Stream ID handshake extension message can be used to identify the stream content, 
> The Stream ID value can be used as free-form, but there is also recommended convention
> that can be used to achieve interoperability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Stream ID handshake extension message can be used to identify the stream content. 
The Stream ID value can be free-form, but there is also a recommended convention
that can be used to achieve interoperability.
```

The Stream ID handshake extension message has SRT_CMD_SID extension type (see {{handshake-ext-type}}.

> The extension contents holds a sequence of UTF-8 characters. The maximum allowed size of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The extension contents are a sequence of UTF-8 characters. The maximum allowed size of the
```

> SrteamID extension is 512 bytes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
StreamID extension is 512 bytes.
```

~~~
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                                                               |
|                           Stream ID                           |
                               ...
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~
{: #fig-hsext-streamid title="Stream ID Extension Message"}

The Extension Contents field holds a sequence of UTF-8 characters (see {{fig-hsext-streamid}}).

> The maximum allowed size of the SrteamID extension is 512 bytes. The actual size is determined

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The maximum allowed size of the StreamID extension is 512 bytes. The actual size is determined
```

by the Extension Length field ({{handshake-packet-structure}}), which defines the length in
four byte blocks. If the actual payload is less than the declared length, the remaining bytes are set to zeros.

The content is stored as 32-bit little endian words.

#### Group Membership Extension

The Group Membership handshake extension is used to distinguish single SRT connections
and bonded SRT connections (group connections).

~~~

> 0                   1                   2                   3
> 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
```

> 0                   1                   2                   3
> 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
```

+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                           Group ID                            |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|     Type    |     Flags     |             Weight              |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~
{: #fig-hsext-group title="Group Membership Extension Message"}

GroupID (32 bits):

> : The group identifier of a group to which there belongs the socket that is making the connection at the sending side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: The identifier of a group whose members include the sender socket that is making a connection.
```

  The target socket that should interpret it should belong to the corresponding group on its side
  (or should create one, if it doesn't exist).

Type (8 bits):
: Group type, as per SRT_GTYPE_ enumeration.

- 0: undefined group type,
- 1: broadcast group type,
- 2: main/backup group type
- 3: balancing group type (reserved for future use)
- 4: multicast group type (reserved for future use)

Flags (8 bits):
: Special flags mostly reserved for the future. See {{fig-hsext-group-flags}}.

Weight (16 bits):
: Special value with interpretation depending on the Type field value.

> - Not used in case of broadcast group.
> - In backup group defines the link priority.
> - In the rest cases the meaning is not yet defined (reserved for future).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Not used with broadcast groups.
- Defines the link priority in backup groups.
- Not yet defined (reserved for future) for any other cases.
```

~~~

> 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
```

|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~
{: #fig-km-msg title="Key Material Message structure"}

S ( ): 1 bit. Value: {0}  

> : This is a fixed-width field that is a remnant from the header of a previous design.

Reviewer: Should that "previous design" be identified?

Author: Maybe better to say it is a reserved field with value of 0. 🤔

Author: Replaced with "This is a fixed-width field that is reserved for future usage."

> : This is a fixed-width field that is a remnant from the header of a previous design.

Reviewer: Might be useful for traceability to identify this "previous design".

## Overview

SRT implements encryption using AES {{AES}} in counter mode (AES-CTR) {{SP800-38A}} with a short-lived key
to encrypt and decrypt the media stream. The AES-CTR cipher is suitable for continuous stream encryption
that permits decryption from any point, without access to start of the stream (random access),
and for the same reason tolerates packet loss. It also offers strong confidentiality when the counter is managed properly.

### Encryption Scope

> SRT encrypts only the payload of SRT data packet ({{data-pkt}}), while the header is left unencrypted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SRT encrypts only the payload of SRT data packets ({{data-pkt}}), while the header is left unencrypted.
```

The unencrypted header contains the Packet Sequence Number field used to keep the synchronization
of the cipher counter between the encrypting sender and the decrypting receiver.

> No constraints apply to the payload of SRT data packet as no padding of the payload is required by counter mode ciphers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No constraints apply to the payload of SRT data packets as no padding of the payload is required by counter mode ciphers.
```

### AES Counter

The counter for AES-CTR is the size of the cipher's block, i.e. 128 bits. It is derived from
a 128-bit sequence consisting of

- a block counter in the least significant 16 bits, which counts the blocks in a packet,

- a packet index - based on the packet sequence number in the SRT header - in the next 32 bits,

- eighty zeroed bits.

The upper 112 bits of this sequence are XORed with an Initialization Vector (IV)
to produce a unique counter for each crypto block. The IV is derived from the Salt
provided in the Keying Material ({{sec-ctrlpkt-km}}):

~~~~
IV = MSB(112, Salt): Most significant 112 bits of the salt.
~~~~

### Stream Encrypting Key (SEK)

The key used for AES-CTR encryption is called the "Stream Encrypting Key" (SEK). It is used for
up to 2^25 packets with further rekeying.
The short-lived SEK is generated by the sender using a pseudo-random number generator (PRNG),
and transmitted within the stream, wrapped with another longer-term key,
the Key Encrypting Key (KEK), using a known AES key wrap protocol.

For connection-oriented transport such as SRT, there is no need to periodically transmit

> the short-lived key since no party can join the stream at any time. The keying material

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the short-lived key since no additional party can join a stream in progress. The keying material
```

is transmitted within the connection handshake packets, and for a short period
when rekeying occurs.

### Key Encrypting Key (KEK)

> The KEK is derived from a secret (passphrase) shared between the sender and the receiver.
> The Key Encrypting Key provides access to the Stream Encrypting Key, which in turn provides access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Key Encrypting Key (KEK) is derived from a secret (passphrase) shared between the sender and the receiver.
The KEK provides access to the Stream Encrypting Key, which in turn provides access
```

to the protected payload of SRT data packets. The KEK has to be at least as long as the SEK.

> The KEK is generated by a password-based key generation function v2.0 (PBKDF2) {{RFC2898}},

Reviewer: My understanding is that PBKDF2 is the second of two functions defined in RFC 2898, not "version 2.0" (i.e. in future, it might happen that there is a version x.y of PBKDF2). Perhaps just drop the "v2.0" (the PBKDF2 in parentheses is specific enough).

Author: Yes, it looks like you are right. Version 2.0 is the version of the `PKCS #5`, which defines the PBKFD2 function.

Author: Removed all v2.0 mentions.

using the passphrase, a number of iterations (2048), a keyed-hash (HMAC-SHA1) {{RFC2104}}, and

> a key length value KLen. The PBKDF2 function hashes the passphrase to make a long string,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a key length value (KLen). The PBKDF2 function hashes the passphrase to make a long string,
```

On the other side, the responder attempts to decode the wrap to obtain the Stream Encrypting Key.
In the protocol for the wrap there is a padding, which is a known template, so the responder
knows from the KM that it has the right KEK to decode the SEK.
The SEK (generated and transmitted by the initiator) is random, and cannot be known in advance.
The KEK formula is calculated on both sides, with the difference that the responder gets
the key length (KLen) from the initiator via the key material (KM).
It is the initiator who decides on the configured length. The responder obtains it from
the material sent by the initiator.

The responder returns the same KM message to show that it has the same information as the initiator,
and that the encoded material will be decrypted. If the responder does not return this status,
this means that it does not have the SEK. All incoming encrypted packets received by the responder
will be lost (undecrypted). Even if they are transmitted
successfully, the receiver will be unable to decrypt them, and so packets will be dropped.
All data packets coming from responder will be unencrypted.

### KM Refresh {#sec-crypt-km-refresh}

> The short lived SEK is regenerated for cryptographic reasons when enough packets have been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The short lived SEK is regenerated for cryptographic reasons when a pre-determined number of packets has been
```

encrypted. The KM refresh period is determined by the implementation.
The receiver knows which SEK (odd or even) was used to encrypt the packet
by means of the KK field of the SRT Data Packet ({{data-pkt}}).

> There are two variables used to determige the KM Refresh timing:
> 
> - KM Refresh Period detemines the number of packets to be sent between two consecutive
>   switch points,
> 
> - KM Pre-Announcement Period determines the number of packets before switch point when
>   the new key is announced., and after the switch point to decommission the old key.
> 
> The recommended value of the KM Refresh Period is after 2^25 packets encrypted with the same SEK are sent.
> The recommended KM Pre-Announcement Period is 4000 packets (i.e. a new key is generated,
> wrapped, and sent at 2^25 minus 4000 packets).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two variables used to determine the KM Refresh timing:

- KM Refresh Period specifies the number of packets to be sent before switching to the new SEK,

- KM Pre-Announcement Period specifies when a new key is announced a number of packets before switchover. The same value is used to determine when to decommission the old key after switchover.

The recommended KM Refresh Period is after 2^25 packets encrypted with the same SEK are sent.
The recommended KM Pre-Announcement Period is 4000 packets (i.e. a new key is generated,
wrapped, and sent at 2^25 minus 4000 packets; the old key is decommissioned at 2^25 plus 4000 packets).
```

Author: > KM Pre-Announcement Period specifies when a new key is announced a number of packets before switchover. The same value is used to determine when to decommission the old key after switchover.

Sounds weird... Maybe:
KM Pre-Announcement Period specifies when a new key is announced in a number of packets before key switchover. The same value is used to determine when to decommission the old key after switchover.

Author: Applied suggested changes with my "fix".

Even and odd keys are alternated during transmission the following way.
The packets with the earlier key #1 (let it be the odd key) will continue to be sent.
The receiver will receive the new key #2 (even), then decrypt and unwrap it.
The receiver will reply to the sender if it is able to understand.

> Once the sender gets to the 2^25 packet using the odd key (key #1), it will then start to
> send packets with the even key (key #2). It knows that the receiver has what it needs to
> decrypt that even key (key #2). This happens transparently, from one packet to the next.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the sender gets to the 2^25th packet using the odd key (key #1), it will then start to
send packets with the even key (key #2), knowing that the receiver has what it needs to
decrypt them. This happens transparently, from one packet to the next.
```

> At 2^25 plus 4000 packets the first key will be decommissioned automatically in this example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At 2^25 plus 4000 packets the first key will be decommissioned automatically.
```

> Both keys live in parallel for the doubled Pre-Announcement Period: one period of the
> KM Pre-Announcement before the key switch and one period after. The period after the switch is needed in case of
> packet retransmission. It is possible for packets with the older key to arrive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both keys live in parallel for two times the Pre-Announcement Period (e.g. 4000 packets before the key switch, and 4000 packets after). This is to allow for packet retransmission. It is possible for packets with the older key to arrive
```

at the receiver a bit late. Each packet contains a description of which key it requires,
so the receiver will still have the ability to decrypt it.

## Encryption Process

> ### Generating Stream Encrypting Key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Generating the Stream Encrypting Key
```

On the sending side SEK, Salt and KEK are generated the following way:

~~~~~~~~~~~
SEK  = PRNG(KLen)
Salt = PRNG(128)
KEK = PBKDF2(passphrase, LSB(64,Salt), Iter, Klen)
~~~~~~~~~~~

where

> - PBKDF2 is the PKCS#5 Password Based Key Derivation Function 2.0,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- PBKDF2 is the PKCS#5 Password Based Key Derivation Function,
```

Author: v2.0 is important 
```suggestion
- PBKDF2 is the PKCS#5 Password Based Key Derivation Function v2.0,
```

- passphrase is the pre-shared passphrase,
- Salt is the field of the KM message,
- LSB(n, v) is the function taking n least significant bits of v,
- Iter=2048 defines the number of iterations for PBKDF2,
- KLen is the field of the KM message.

~~~~~~~~~~~
Wrap = AESkw(KEK, SEK)
~~~~~~~~~~~

where AESkw(KEK, SEK) is the key wrapping function {{RFC3394}}.

### Encrypting the Payload

The encryption of the payload of the SRT DATA packet is done with AES-CTR

~~~~~~~~~~~
EncryptedPayload = AES_CTR_Encrypt(SEK, IV, UnencryptedPayload)
~~~~~~~~~~~

where the Initialization Vector is derived as

~~~~~~~~~~~
IV = (MSB(112, Salt) << 2) XOR (PktSeqNo)
~~~~~~~~~~~

> - PktSeqNo is the value of the Packet Sequence Number field of SRT DATA packet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- PktSeqNo is the value of the Packet Sequence Number field of the SRT data packet.
```

## Decryption Process

> ### Restoring Stream Encrypting Key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Restoring the Stream Encrypting Key
```

For the receiver to be able to decrypt the incoming stream it has to know the stream encrypting key (SEK)

> used by the sender. The receiver MUST know the passphrase used by the sender. The rest information can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
used by the sender. The receiver MUST know the passphrase used by the sender. The remaining information can
```

be extracted from the Keying Material message.

The Keying Material message contains the AES-wrapped {{RFC3394}} SEK used by the encoder.

> The Key-Encryption Key (KEK) is required to unwrap

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Key-Encryption Key (KEK) is required to unwrap
```
```suggestion
The Key-Encryption Key (KEK) required to unwrap the SEK is calculated as:
```

~~~~~~~~~~~
KEK = PBKDF2(passphrase, LSB(64,Salt), Iter, KLen)
~~~~~~~~~~~

where

> - PBKDF2 is the PKCS#5 Password Based Key Derivation Function 2.0,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- PBKDF2 is the PKCS#5 Password Based Key Derivation Function,
```

Author: ```suggestion
- PBKDF2 is the PKCS#5 Password Based Key Derivation Function v2.0,
```

- passphrase is the pre-shared passphrase,
- Salt is the field of the KM message,
- LSB(n, v) is the function taking n least significant bits of v,
- Iter=2048 defines the number of iterations for PBKDF2,
- KLen is the field of the KM message.

~~~~~~~~~~~
SEK = AESkuw(KEK, Wrap)
~~~~~~~~~~~

where AESkuw(KEK, Wrap) is the key unwrapping function.

### Decrypting the Payload

> The decryption of the payload of the SRT DATA packet is done with AES CTR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The decryption of the payload of the SRT data packet is done with AES-CTR
```

~~~~~~~~~~~
DecryptedPayload = AES_CTR_Encrypt(SEK, IV, EncryptedPayload)
~~~~~~~~~~~

where the Initialization Vector is derived as

~~~~~~~~~~~
IV = (MSB(112, Salt) << 2) XOR (PktSeqNo)
~~~~~~~~~~~

> - PktSeqNo is the value of the Packet Sequence Number field of SRT DATA packet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- PktSeqNo is the value of the Packet Sequence Number field of the SRT data packet.
```
